Hello everyone and welcome to the low level array lecture in this lecture we're going to be going over
basically how computers store information on a low level civil focus on computer memory how we have
memory addresses.
So how a computer can actually keep track of where information is stored.
We'll have units of memory such as bits and bytes and learning how memory is retrieved.
So just a quick note the next few slides are a little text heavy.
But as we continue on we'll see more and more picture examples of what we're actually talking about
.
So it's going and continue.
So in order to accurately describe the way Python represents the sequence types we're going to have
to learn about this low level computer architecture.
So the primary memory of a computer is composed of bits of information and the bits are typically grouped
into larger units that depend on Usually the precise system architecture.
But a typical unit is a byte which is equivalent to eight bits.
And so a computer system will have a huge number of bytes and memory and to keep track of what information
is stored and what byte the computer uses in abstraction known as a memory address.
And in effect each byte of memory is associated with a unique number that serves as its address.
So for instance you might have byte number 2 1 1 2 1 4 4 versus byte number 2 1 4 7.
And in that way the computer system can refer to the data and the memory addresses are typically coordinated
with the physical layout of the memory system.
So let's go ahead and see kind of a drawing example of that.
So this is usually how we represent a low level computer memory.
It's individual bytes with consecutive addresses.
OK.
So despite the sequential nature of the numbering system loops the computer hardware is designed in
theory so that any byte of the main memory can be efficiently accessed based upon its memory address
.
So in this sense we can say that a computer's main memory performs as a random access memory.
Our am and that is to say it's just as easy to retrieve let's say byte number 8 6 7 5 3 0 9 as it is
to retrieve byte number three or nine.
So each individual byte of memory can be stored or retrieved in order one time.
So in constant time and in general a programming language keeps track of the association between an
identifier and the memory address in which the associated value is stored.
So you for example might have an identifier x might be associated with one value stored in memory while
Y is associate of another value stored in memory and a common programming task is to keep track of a
sequence of related objects.
For example if you're making a video game and you want to keep track of the top 10 scores for that game
rather than use 10 different variables for that task you'd prefer to use a single name for the group
and then use index numbers to refer to each of those high scores within that group.
Ok on to next slide.
So a group of related variables can be stored one after another in a contiguous portion of the computer's
memory and we can then note that representation as an array.
So that's what we're really talking about.
So let's go ahead and see a more tangible example such as a text string stored as an ordered sequence
of individual characters and something to note here is that Python internally represents each Unicode
character with 16 bits or two bytes for each character.
So we actually diagram it out.
It looks like that.
So here we have our bits 16 of them and since each Unicode character with 16 bits needs two bytes for
the character.
If we have a sample string so we have a six character string here such a sample it would be stored in
12 consecutive bytes of memory.
Since each Unicode character is taking two bytes or 16 bits since two times eight is 16.
OK so what's up next.
Just some basic terminology.
We have an array here of six characters in each location within the array.
We can call a cell and the integer index can be used to describe its location.
So for example in this figure the cell of the array of index 4 has the contents L and it's stored in
bytes to 1 to 5 4 and 2 1 to 5 5 of memory so something that's important to know is that each cell of
an array must use the same number of bytes.
And it's this requirement is what allows an arbitrary cell of the array or any randomly chosen cell
or any randomly accessed cell of the array to be accessed in constant time based on its index.
So in particular if we know the memory address at which an array starts and the number of bytes per
elements.
So in this case to for a Unicode character and the desired index within the array then the appropriate
memory address can be computed using something like Star Plus the cell size times the index.
So by this formula since the cell at index 0 begins precisely at the start of the array the at index
1 begins precisely as a cell size.
Bytes beyond the start of the array and so on.
So in order to fleshed out a little more some numbers the cell of this figure cell 4 begins at memory
location 2 1 4 6 plus 2 times 4 which is 2 1 4 6 Plus 8 which is 2 1 5 4 and we can see here that indeed
the lower letter L begins at 2 1 5 4.
So I got that by just saying our star is 2 1 4 6 and I'm adding the cell size which is 2.
In this case Reason two bytes per Unicode character and times 4 which is the index I want to achieve
or access.
Excuse me.
And that's going to be two and four six times two plus two times four which is eight.
So two and four six plus eight brings us to 1 5 4 and that's how I can access index for there or the
letter L.
So that's the low level thinking.
But usually we're thinking on a higher level abstraction and basic abstraction is what we're really
going to use for real world discussions when we're discussing the interview problems we really won't
be talking about those bits and bytes we'll be talking about real world real world abstraction levels
.
This higher level or are we just saying we have this sample string here and the indexes are 0 1 2 3
4 and 5 we won't be worrying about cell size or bytes per elements.
OK.
So moving along the last topic for this lecture is going to be a referential array and how arrays can
use object references.
So it's a pretty important topic and it's going to seem maybe a little confusing at first but at the
end we're going to drive it home with a bunch of examples and it should be pretty clear to you what
the array is doing by referencing.
So let's imagine we have an example we have 100 student names with associated ID numbers.
So we have a student name let's say Renee.
Another student named Joseph we have Janet Jonas.
Helen in Virginia.
And each of those students has an ID number with them 0 1 2 3 4 5.
So you might be considering using an array based structure to maintain the names of the students currently
assigned to the ID numbers.
So in python we would just use a list of names in brackets and we want to represent this list with an
array.
But remember we must adhere to the requirement that each cell of the array uses the same number of bytes
.
And yet the elements are strings and strings naturally have different lengths.
So we could attempt to reserve enough space for each cell to hold the maximum length string not just
that currently stored strings but of any string we might ever want to store.
So a maximum length of any possible name the matter how long your name is.
But that would actually be kind of wasteful.
We'd be using a lot of space almost preemptively in case a name popped up.
So on our last example we saw the word sample used.
But in this case we'd have to kind of set aside bytes of information for names so we don't know how
long they're going to be.
So instead of doing that well we're going to do is making an array in use object references.
So let's go in and see a diagram of what that looks like.
So here we can see that each element is a reference to the object.
So we have index 0 referencing the object that string Renee.
And we have a list now of names where the index is referencing an object.
So although the relative size of the individual elements may vary the number of bits used to store the
memory address of each element is fixed.
And in this way Python can support that constant time axis that order 1 to a list or tuple element based
on its index.
So in this figure we characterize this list of strings that are names of the students and it's more
likely that we would be able to manage this using that list of references.
OK so let's go and see some more examples of referencing objects to the list so the idea that listen
to polls are essentially referential structures is pretty significant to the semantics of these objects
classes.
So a single list instance may include multiple references to the same objects as elements of the list
.
And it's possible for a single object to be an element of two or more lists and we'll see what that
looks like in a diagram.
Just a second.
So we can have two lists simply store references back to the same object.
So an example of this is maybe when you're slicing a list the result looks like a new list instance
but that new list actually has references to the same elements that are in the original list.
So who's going to see what that looks like.
So here we've computed the slice of a list here on the bottom a list called primes.
And it's just the prime numbers.
Notice how each of these indexes.
0 1 2 3 4 up to 7 is referencing some prime integer.
And then if we say temp.
Some new list equals primes 3 through 6.
This new temp list this temporary list is referencing the same elements.
Here are the same objects.
So we're not actually creating new objects we're just referencing them when we do this slice of the
list.
OK so what if we do some sort of maybe a reassignments.
So in this case when the elements of the list are immutable objects and since integers are immutable
the fact that the two lists share elements isn't really significant as neither the list can cause a
change to the shared object.
So for example I said temp of two is equal to 15.
So here is a temp of 2 is equal to 15.
What I'm actually doing is just changing the existing reference here.
So I'm not changing the actual integer object so I didn't change 13.
I just pointed to the index to on the template to another object.
OK.
And so this same type of semantics here demonstrated when you're making a new list as a copy of an existing
one.
So if you're using a syntax such as what I have here in bold make maybe you make a list.
You have a new list.
They are in play calling back up and use sort of equal to list of primes which you're actually doing
is just producing a new list that's a shallow copy in that it references all the same elements as in
the first list.
You're not actually duplicating those original objects you're just duplicating a list that references
those same objects.
OK.
And if you wanted the contents of the list maybe like they were immutable type so you're referencing
a list to a list.
You could make what's called the deep copy meaning a new list with new elements and that can be produced
by using the deep copy function from the copy module in Python.
Main takeaway here is that if you were to make a new list in a normal manner you would just be making
a shallow copy and that it's referencing the same elements as the first list.
So in order to really show this will kind of do a more extreme example.
So a lot of times in Python.
And I just added an asterix notation here.
So a lot of times in Python you'll see a list initiated like this you'll have an element 0 and then
say times 8.
So that's actually doing as you're saying all eight cells reference the same objects.
If every list here counters each of these cells is a reference to the same object you're not actually
making 8 integer objects you're referencing all to the same zero number there.
So at a first glance you may think this is a little alarming but what we rely on is the fact that that
reference integer is immutable.
So even if you have a command such as taking counter's index too and adding 1 to it something like this
.
So you say counters two plus equals one that does not technically change that value of the existing
integer instance.
What it does it just computes a new integer with value 0 plus 1 and then set cell number two to reference
that newly computed value and then the resulting figuration looks like what we have here in the Strine
.
So really the takeaway here is how each of these index are in the season the cells and then the list
is actually just referencing some objects and depending on how we make our copies we could just be making
a copy of those references not of the objects themselves.
OK.
So last diagram example I want to show you is if you're doing something such as extends the X10 command
is used to add all mints from one list to the end of another.
But you should note that the extended list does not receive copies of those elements.
Instead what it's receiving the references to those elements and so here we have a diagram kind of portraying
that effect.
So if I were to say this list primes two that list from the beginning we have indexes zero of 3:07 and
numbers the prime numbers to 3:19.
If I extend it with let's say another list that's three elements long extras.
What I'm actually doing is I'm just adding the references to the SEC to the first list here the primes
list.
And that's really the main takeaway that I'm adding references.
Each of these cells is really a reference to an object and I can have multiple this with multiple cells
all referencing the same object.
OK.
So just to review of gone over in this section we went over a very basic computer architecture low level
thinking of low level array representation and how bits and bytes can be used in order have constant
time.
Or order one.
Access to any random elements in the array and then we learn about how arrays are able to be referential
and use referencing in order for each cell or index to reference an object in an array.
All right.
So I know we did quite a bit here and we went over quite a bit.
What we're going to do next is learn about dynamic arrays.
Now as far as how this information applies to the interview practice problems really the main takeaway
from a practical perspective is that idea of referencing.
So if you want to play around the more practical perspective of this lecture go ahead and make a couple
of lists.
Use extend and use a pens and then use slices.
Maybe try to edit some of the objects that the list indexes are indices are referencing and make sure
you really understand that if you make a change on one list the other reference on the other list may
or may not get affected depending on how you code it out.
OK.
So that's really where the practical use case comes in here.
That idea of referencing and how slices kind of carry over that reference or how the extend the method
would also carry over that reference and that you're not actually in a sense duplicating or creating
new objects you're just referencing the old ones.
All right thanks.
I know that was kind of a heavy lecture and pretty theoretical but overall it's important to know especially
from a practical perspective that idea of referencing.
All right.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.
We'll we are going to be discussing dynamic race